# Port Wine

Hello! My name is Andreia Gaita, I am your portuguese win host for this session! Today we're going to talk about port wines - where they come from, what they are, and how to recognize a good one when you see it ;)

Before I start with all the port wine goodness, I'd like to highlight the Fact Of The Day(tm)! GitHub is a singular company, as it is one of the very few non-portuguese companies to have more than one portuguese employee. It is especially singular as it has not one, not two, but in fact THREE portuguese employees! This is a rare occasion, as we are not that many (only 10 million in a tiny corner of Europe). Although we do export a lot of us everywhere, and so there are many expat portuguese communities out there, all of the portuguese at GitHub do, in fact, originate directly from Portugal! Besides myself, there is Victor Monteiro and João Ribeiro (john creek for you anglophones out there). This is just one of the many facts that make me proud of being an Octocat ^_^

It is also noteworthy that we don't actually hire in Portugal, as all us portuguese were out of the country when it came time to decide which countries we would need to have a base for hiring on - none of us actually live in Portugal, and this is the fate of us portuguese, forever everywhere except in our home country. Hint hint!

Now that we've had our awkward moment, let's get to our juicy topic of the day - Port Wine!

Port Wine, or Vinho do Porto, comes from the Douro region. It is named Port because the capital of the region is the city of Porto (Oporto for you anglophones out there). Port, Porto, you can see where I'm going with this.

_Insert handy Port wine region map_

Port wine is classified as spirits, meaning that it has more than 16% alcohol. It is a fortified wine, meaning that it is a wine up to a point in it's production, when it undergoes a fortification process that raises it's alcohol level to around 20%. Regular wines go from around 13% alcohol to up-to 15.5%. Although you will rarely see a wine in the US that goes more than 14%, there are other regions in the world - namely Portugal - that produce wines up to 15.5% (and if you ever see one of 15%+ wines, make sure you wait at least 4 years from bottling year to drink it, it needs some aging time ;))

Port wines can only come from the Douro region. They are a worldwide demarcated region brand, just like only bubbly wines from the Champagne region can be called Champagne. If you see a Port wine originating from anywhere else in the world, it can be many things, but Port isn't one of them ;)

Port wine grapes are native to the Douro region, and are very alcoholic grapes - meaning that they are extremely large sweet grapes if you happen to get your hands on a __insert name of Cacho in english here__. All that sugar and moistness breaks down into a lot of very sweet alcohol during the wine production process, and up to three hundred plus years ago, that was the basic trademark of the wines of that region - extremely sweet and strong.

To explain how these wines came to be Port, I need to make a quick detour into history at this point. Did you know that Portugal and England have the oldest active treaty in the world? Indeed, the treaty of friendship between Portugal and England was signed in the 1300s by __Insert King of Portugal and King of England here__, and it has been regularly invoked - and thus reactivated - throghout the centuries. The last time it was invoked was by Winston Churchill during the second world war.

Portugal was neutral during the second world war - if you have ever watched Casablanca you will know that the lead characters in that movie were desperately seeking a flight to Lisbon, on their way to freedom (spoiler alert!). For Portugal to allow the use of the Azores island as a base in the Atlantic, it would have to break its neutrality, and that would drag into the war, and Spain with it, and probably half of North Africa. It would be bad.

Churchill, however, old dog that he was, figured it out! He went to Parliament and announced that the British Government was invoking the treaty between Portugal and England, and that this allowed the use of Portuguese territory of the Azores for British operations. Pretty much the entire parliament had never heard of this treaty, and they were worried that this would cause Portugal to enter the war, but Churchill assured them that the activation of the treaty would allow the use of the islands without compromising the neutrality of Portugal in the war.  And so it was!

I'm telling you this so that you can understand the relations between Portugal and England and how Port wine came about due to this. Around the __Insert year of creation of Port wine__, the British people were increasingly fond of Portuguese wine. They had already made Tea, a Portuguese import by Queen Catarina __insert tea queen name here__ their national drink, and they really wanted to transport Portuguese wine from Portugal to England, but unfortunately the transport ships took too long and the wine would sour by the time it reached England.

Someone __insert name of port wine creator here__ had the bright idea of adding alcohol to the wine, fortifying it for the trip. During the long trip the alcohol that was added broke down into sugar, so by the time the fortified wine got to England, it would be a nice strong sweet wine.

This is the origin of Port wine, and it also explains why most Port wines have english names - Portuguese didn't care about Port wine until the 1800s, and most of the houses producing Port were english, exporting it exclusively to England (after all, if you live in Portugal, why would you care about fortified wine if you can drink the real thing fresh of the barrels? ;))

## Port wine varieties

If there's anything that you take from this sessions, it's this - never drink a Port wine that's less than 10 years old. Please don't. It's a waste of a perfectly fine future wine. If someone gives you a Port wine that's less than that (or you find a bargain somewhere), stuff it horizontally in a nice cool place with a constant temperature and give it 10 years (no matter its current age). In 10 years, take it out, put it upright for a week (so it settles and any deposits go to the bottom), and then you can open it and enjoy it. It really doesn't matter what type of Port wine it is, just do it.

Port wine comes in two varieties - Tawny and Ruby. Tawny is dry, Ruby is sweet. Tawny wines age in casks, Ruby wines age in bottles. This is an important distinction ;)

Any wine that has never been exposed to air will immediately oxidize when the bottle is open. This means that it will go bad in a day or two. The more exposure to air a wine has before going to the bottle, the longer it will last once the bottle is open.

A Vintage Port is a Ruby Port from a single harvest of year X, aged in the bottle. Last year a Vintage Port from __Insert year here__ was sold to a private collector - it was the oldest Port wine known to have been traded in the market. To maintain a Port wine across centuries, it needs to be refreshed every now and then - a Port bottle is opened every 20 or 30 years and tasted, and then topped off with another bottle from the same year. Many Port wines died to bring us this single Port wine bottle. I was in Lisbon recently and tasted a Vintage from 2000, and it was everything a Port wine should be, sweet and full and yummy. If you want to drink a Vintage, it should not be less than 10 years old, preferably 15, and you better be prepared to drink it all, because it will not last more than 2 days once the bottle is open. Do not decant it, you want to have the least amount of air possible in the bottle, and keep the bottle corked for as long as possible.

Recently (as of the new millenium), a vintage variant has been created - it's called Late Bottle Vintage. As the name states, it is a Vintage wine (meaning that it's a Port wine from a single year harvest, usually Ruby, that spends most of its time in the bottle), but it's "Late Bottle", meaning that it spends some of its time aging in casks - usually about 4 years. This means that it still retains the Vintage qualities, but that it survives more time when the bottle is open, because it has already been exposed to air while aging in the cask. LBVs (as they're called) are a very decent compromise between Vintage and how-fast-can-I-kill-this-bottle, in that they'll last up to two weeks once the bottle is open and they're still just as yummy as a Vintage. Again, make sure you're drinking one that is at least 10 years old from harvest time. The year on the label is usually harvest year (so a 2005 LBV will be Just Fine(tm)), but read the label to make sure.

Tawny wines are aged in casks - that means that they have long air exposures, which means that a bottle of Port of the Tawny variety will last from 1 or 4 months after the bottle has been opened, depending on the age of the Port. You can find Tawnys from 10 to 40 years old in the market - meaning that the bottle will not have a year, but instead it will say "aged X years". These wines have a mix of several harvest years in them (so they're not all from the same year), but they will have been aged at least that many years. Old Tawny ports will be golden or amber colored, and they won't taste like anything you expect from a young sweet Port - they're tart and full in the mouth, and taste almost like Muscat wines. You can find single year Tawny Ports, but probably not in your neighbourhood store - I recently tried a 1944 Tawny that was bottled in the 2000s (so 60 years in cask), and oh my wasn't it delightful.

So remember folks, when in doubt, stuff that Port wine in the shelf for 10 or 15 years (no more than 20 or you'll have to refresh it!), and enjoy your Ports!